[Music]
firstly
if you have not listened to my papa
primer the episode immediately prior to
this
you should it sets the scene as i take
some key discoveries of papa
and explain them here i want to show how
david deutsch takes some of those ideas
even further again i must emphasize that
this is not
canon and i would not presume that this
is even necessarily endorsed by david
deutsch
once more this is merely my
interpretation of a particular lineage
of this philosophy
and once more i'll provide four key
insights in order to summarise
just a part of the work of david deutsch
one the search for good explanations
a key insight of karl popper was to
understand that science could be
distinguished from non-science
by the criterion of falsifiability
deutsch showed that this
is more or less a special case of what
he has called
the search for good explanations a good
explanation is an explanation that is
hard to vary
while still doing the job of accounting
for what it purports to account for
in science one way in which a theory is
hard to vary
is that it is testable but deutsche's
concept of good explanations traverses
all our knowledge whether it be science
or mathematics history or morality
even art in a good explanation each part
of the explanation has a function
such that if one attempts to change that
part the entire structure could collapse
into nonsense
electrons cannot be replaced by
neutrinos stars cannot be replaced by
planets
lions by bacteria carbon dioxide by neon
churchill by genghis khan and so on
these parts of theories serve a purpose
in the overall explanation
and are not arbitrary but this is not to
say that they cannot possibly be
improved upon
which leads to two unbounded progress
while popper understood that we are not
seeking provably true ideas
david deutsch has explained how unless a
law of physics stands in our way
nothing can stop us from achieving
anything we want to
except our lack of knowledge so we must
create knowledge
and some of this knowledge not only
solves a local parochial
problem but some have infinite reach
some have the capacity to transform not
only the situation in which we find
ourselves
but will continue to transform
situations far from where we began
and indeed will transform physical
reality off into the infinite future
einstein may among other things have
been seeking a way of correcting
predictions about the orbit of mercury
around the sun but his theory
the general fear of relativity was also
a jump to universality it applied
everywhere in the universe
at all times just like newton's did some
ideas
are so deep and profound they stretch
from their discoverer working behind
some desk in a small room
to the rest of the universe and off into
an unbounded future
which leads us to three
explanations transformed the world
papa knew there should always be a third
way sort
or that we should reject the false
dichotomy in favor of a better way
this feeds into david's placing of human
creativity at the center of problem
solving
it's not just the two choices you are
presented with
your task is often to create something
new
this is a key feature for many reasons
but not least of which
is that our capacity to create
explanatory knowledge is the defining
characteristic of a person
it is what we do it is what we expect
artificial general intelligence will be
able to do
and what we would regard intelligent
alien life
as being capable of doing david answered
the question
what is a person and thereby connected
people to explanatory knowledge that can
change the world
literally transform physical reality
this is not a religious notion but it
does give meaning to the existence of
humanity in the world
this is rejection of so much nihilism
that infects
modern philosophy and other dogmas and
it is a rejection of the supernatural
or other appeals to claims of perfect
knowledge
which leads us to for do not destroy the
means of error correction
papa was right to emphasize that
authorities wherever they make claims in
science or politics
can frustrate the problem-solving
enterprise deutsche took up this theme
and ran with it
sharpening it into a moral guide a guide
against which
any claim in any domain must be measured
does this destroy the means of error
correction this
deep linking of morality and
epistemology might very well collapse
all of morality into epistemology
for what is necessary is problem solving
dynamism not stasis and so societies
that allow for errors to be corrected
turn out to be dynamic while those that
frustrate error correction
become static their progress slows they
can become extinct
and as david deutsch himself says we can
survive
and we can fail to survive
but it depends not on chance but on
whether we create
the relevant knowledge in time uh the
danger is not at all
unprecedented species go extinct all the
time
civilizations end the overwhelming
majority of all species and all
civilizations that have ever
existed are now history and if we want
to be the exception to that
then logically our only hope
is to make use of the one feature that
distinguishes our species and our
civilization
from all the others namely our special
relationship with the laws of physics
our ability to create new explanations
new knowledge to be a hub of existence
so now you have digested some david
deutsch this may become an occasional
series alongside my more undisciplined
much longer podcasts on these ideas
until then
[Music]
you